---
citekey: banfieldWhatReallyWrong2004
title: What's Really Wrong with Ethnography?.
authors: Grant Banfield
year: 2004
abstract: 
open in Zotero: zotero://select/items/@banfieldWhatReallyWrong2004
---
APA:
Grant Banfield. (2004). What's Really Wrong with Ethnography?.. International Education Journal. 53–63.
MLA:
Grant Banfield. What's Really Wrong with Ethnography?.. International Education Journal. 2004.

---

==While deep structures and generative mechanisms are not readily apparent, they can be observed
and experienced through their effects.== In critical realist terms, structures are social relations and
not the events, actions or behaviours they generate. Accordingly, the objects of social research are
those
… persistent relations between individuals and groups, and with the relations between
these relations. Relations such as between capitalist and worker, MP and constituent,
student and teacher, husband and wife. Now such relations are general and relatively
enduring but they do not involve collective or mass behaviour. Bhaskar (1989, p.71)
Not only is it possible to know things as they appear but also to have knowledge of deeper
enduring social relations from which appearances emerge. Unlike the straightforward claim of
subtle realism that social objects exist whether they are known or not, critical realism recognises
that something may be real without it appearing at all. Critical realism is trans-phenomenological
acknowledging that structures may have unexercised causal powers. Like the causal powers
pertaining to combustible fuel are only activated under certain conditions (that is, in the presence
of heat, fire or a spark), the powers of social forms are realised under certain socio-historical
conditions. There are no guarantees, for example, that the emancipatory potential of the working
class will be realised in socialist revolution. Nor can the disappearance of class be deduced from
predictive failures of social theory. Events are not determined by mechanisms and causal laws are
not predictions. ==Explanations generated by ethnography, or the work any social science, refer to
mechanisms that may or may not be active at any point in time.==
In this critical realist light we can see the limits of Popper’s (and Hammersley’s) criticism of
Marx’s view of history. Both hold to Actualism (i.e. there are no enduring structures, only states
of affairs) and both are empirical realists (i.e. claim that theories are falsified by counterfactual
occurrences). Popper (like, Hammersley), charges Marx with being “guilty of the misguided and
noxious view that history has a pattern and a meaning that, if grasped, can be used in the present
to predict the future” (McLellan, 1991, p.239). However, theories whose objects exist in open
systems cannot be falsified by either failed predictions or evidence of counter examples: “theory is
never disconfirmed by the contradictory behaviour of the uncontrolled world” (Bhaskar, 1978,
p.119). This is not to insulate them from scrutiny but to recognize the fact that concrete social
reality is multiply determined. It is the job of social science to establish the relationships between
co-determining mechanisms (be they realised or unrealised)6.

......

Importantly, ==mechanisms simultaneously pre-exist and depend upon human agency.== Critical
realism recognises the “vexatious fact” of society (Archer, 1995) that social reality is as it is
because of its human constitution. It is thus the task of social science to establish the necessary
structural conditions given for conscious human activity. In addition, it is especially important in
(critical) ethnography where research is directed to the study of human interaction in everyday
causal contexts that the latter cannot be reduced to the former:
In their conscious human activity, [people] for the most part unconsciously reproduce
(or occasionally, transform) the structures that govern their substantive activities of
production. Thus people do not marry to reproduce the nuclear family, or work to
reproduce the capitalist economy. But it is nevertheless the unintended consequence
(and inexorable result) of, as it is also the necessary condition for their activity.
Bhaskar (1989, p.80)

......

If this paper has been successful in arguing for a depth realism (of which Bhaskar’s critical
realism and Marx’s materialist view of history are examples) to under labour ethnography, then
what confronts critical ethnographers is what this might mean for practice. The following list is
offered to begin to draw out implications for methodological practice. It is not intended to be
exhaustive.
• Holds to a stratified emergent ontology with a materialist view of history as its foundation.
• Takes structures, generative mechanisms as their objects of inquiry.
• Advocates a “standpoint epistemology” (McLaren 1998, p.459).
• Acknowledges the fallibility of knowledge.
• Accepts the openness of the social world.
• Understands events as the outcome of multiple causal processes.
However, as Bhaskar insists, reclaiming reality requires not just exposing ideologies that deny it
but retrieving it from the effects of those ideologies. After all, following Marx, the point is not
simply to interpret the world but to change it. Bhaskar continues:
What should be done with this reality once it is reclaimed? It should, I suggest, be
used, nurtured and valued in an ecologically sustainable and humane way for human
emancipation, happiness and flourishing. Bhaskar (1991, p.144)
Here Bhaskar points to the possibility, if not the necessity, of an emancipatory social science of
which critical ethnography would be part. Contra to Hammersley’s desire to separate ethnography
from other forms practice like political action a transcendental realism would see radical
transformative practice worthy of ethnography.