---
citekey: collinsWhySocialSciences1994
title: Why the social sciences won't become high-consensus, rapid-discovery science
authors: Randall Collins
year: 1994
abstract: A research front of rapid discovery, leaving a trail of cognitive consensus behind it, is characteristic of natural sciences since about the 17th century in Europe. The basis of this high-consensus, rapid-discovery science is not empiricism, since empirical research existed in the natural sciences before the 17th century. The key is appropriation of genealogies of research technologies, which are pragmatically manipulated and modified to produce new phenomena; high consensus results because there is higher social prestige in moving ahead to new research discoveries than by continuing to dispute the interpretation of older discoveries. The social sciences have not acquired this pattern of rapid discovery with high consensus behind the research front. Their fundamental disability is not lack of empirical research, nor failure to adhere to a scientific epistemology, nor the greater ideological controversy that surrounds social topics. What is fundamentally lacking in the social sciences is a genealogy of research technology, whose manipulation reliably produces new phenomena and a rapidly moving research front. Unless the social sciences invent new research hardware, they will likely never acquire much consensus or rapid discovery. Possibilities may exist for such development stemming from research technologies in microsociology and in artificial intelligence.
open in Zotero: zotero://select/items/@collinsWhySocialSciences1994
---
APA:
Randall Collins. (1994). Why the social sciences won't become high-consensus, rapid-discovery science. Sociol Forum. 155–177.
MLA:
Randall Collins. Why the social sciences won't become high-consensus, rapid-discovery science. Sociol Forum. 1994.

---

#### p.164

Research technologies are not necessarily the brain-children of scientific theorists--ideas embodied in physical apparatus. The Kuhnian paradigm, insofar as it is a cognitive model of the topic under investigation, gives a misleading sense of what scientists on a research forefront are doing. The scientists may have quite irrelevant ideas of how their equipment is operating. What guides them is on a nonintellectual level, a sense of what kinds of physical manipulations have resulted in interesting phenomena in the past, and of what sorts of modifications might be tried that will produce yet further phenomena. This is not to say that scientists' ideas are superfluous; scientists can bring their equipment-generated discoveries into the social community of scientists only by interpreting them in concepts related to the going currency of intellectual discussion. Research scientists lead a double life: as intellectuals in the game of argument for theoretical positions and as possessors of a genealogy of machines.

Just as the intellectual community consists in networks that pass ideas, problems and social validation along from one person to another, research technologies comprise a parallel set of networks. One machine gives rise to another in a genealogical succession: by modifying the past machine, or by cloning it from another in the same laboratory, or by a kind of sexual reproduction recombining patts from several existing pieces of equipment. Human and machine networks develop symbiotically; a machine embodies the results of the human activity that went into making it work in a particular way, while these human skills are typically tacit (H. Collins, 1974) and cannot be conveyed to another person except by hands-on experience at the machine. There is some evidence that research technologies on the active cutting edge can only be made to operate successfully by persons trained on the immediately preceding generation of machines. For instance, Boyle's vacuum pump diffused to other researchers only through a network of persons who had used an earlier exemplar (Shapin and Shaffer, 1985:229-230, 281). Sometimes there are bigger breaks in the genealogy of research equipment, as when one scientist recognizes that something may be made analogous to the kind of equipment used in another line of research, perhaps even the word of mouth that a particular kind of equipment has yielded interesting results.

Two implications of this genealogical structure of equipment are important for the social organization of rapid discovery science. One is that

#### p.165

==access to the forefront research technology tends to be socially concentrated;== since new discoveries are produced by machines based on those that had made the previous discoveries, the new discoverers are likely to be persons who worked intimately with the previous round of equipment. It is not unusual for a person admitted to the scientific network as a laboratory technician to become a notable discoverer in his or her own right--as Hooke did by working with Boyle and his equipment, or the instrument maker Watt who developed a steam engine after working for the chemist Black. Limited access to forefront research equipment is one of the features that reduces competition among rival scientific theories and helps bring about consensus. 

The other result is that ==research equipment, once routinized, may be exported from the laboratory, where they stand as physical reminders of the scientific theories that are associated with them.== The triumphs of applied science are not necessarily the application of a scientific theory to a layperson's problem. They often consist in a practical activity developed in the laboratory and then reproduced in the field; for instance, the pasteurization of milk to eradicate disease consisted in transforming the dairy into a technological routine resembling that of the medical laboratory (Latour, 1988). We noted above that scientific research equipment may begin by being imported into the laboratory after existing, perhaps for hundreds of years, in the lay world. After modifications at the hands of scientists, the equipment may become commercially viable when reintroduced into the lay world. Thus the research device for producing and detecting electromagnetic waves could be adopted for lay use as the radio. Once this happens, the research process is socially legitimized to a high degree: not merely on the level of ideology (which may wax and wane), but in the taken-for-granted practices of everyday life. Rapid-discovery science generates a strong sense of its objectivity and factuality because its research technology produces many allies. 

In these ways, genealogies of research technologies play a key role in every aspect of modern rapid discovery science: making possible rapid movement along a research front, creating a sense that new discoveries are always possible, turning attention away from old controversies in order to get on with still newer discoveries, and promoting consensus and the sense of objectivity of past results.

### DO THE SOCIAL DISCIPLINES HAVE RAPID DISCOVERY RESEARCH TECHNOLOGIES?

#### p.166

The problem of the social disciplines is not their youth. They have not lacked sizable bodies of practitioners and institutional bases of support during the past several centuries at least. Yet they have had neither rauch consensus--sociology in particular is famous for its battles among opposing schools of thought--nor a pattern of rapid discovery. 

As long as we believed that the problem was in the area of theoretical approaches or methodological canons, it was possible to believe sociology might be made scientific. It should be necessary only for enough sociologists to adopt the right approach and to cease using unscientific methods. In fact, the latter part of the prescription would be redundant, since in a rapid discovery science those who clung to methods that did not bring new results would soon be unstaged by the achievements of those who were moving ahead. 

Comparative evidence does not support the picture that a field becomes a rapid-discovery science by adopting particular ideas or methodological canons. That is not to say that these theories and methods are worthless; they may yield some good results without bringing about consensus and rapid discovery. It should be noted that if sociology is not a rapid-discovery science, it does not follow that it is not a science of any kind; it may weil resemble the naturat sciences before the rapid-discovery revolution, something like Chinese astronomy or Greek mathematics.