---
citekey: shihEnglishWritingsHu2013
title: English Writings of Hu Shih
authors: Hu Shih
year: 2013
abstract: 
open in Zotero: zotero://select/items/@shihEnglishWritingsHu2013
---
APA:
Hu Shih. (2013). English Writings of Hu Shih. . .
MLA:
Hu Shih. English Writings of Hu Shih. . 2013.

---

## 26 The Scientific Spirit and Method in Chinese Philosophy

###### p.279

“The Way (Tao) does nothing, yet it leaves nothing undone.” That is the central idea of this naturalistic conception of the universe. It became the cornerstone of a political theory of non-activity, non-interference, laissez faire (wu-wei). “The best ruler is one whose existence is scarcely noticed by the people.” And the same idea was developed into a moral philosophy of humility, of non-resistance to evil and violence. “The supreme good is likened to water which benefits all things and resists none.” “The weak and yielding always wins over the hard and strong.” “There is always the Great Executioner that executes. [That is the great Way, which does nothing but leaves nothing undone.] To do the executing for the Great Executioner is like doing the chopping for the master carpenter. He who does the chopping for the master carpenter rarely escapes injuring his own hand.”[^1]

###### p. 282

But Wang Ch’ung more frequently cited facts of everyday experience as proofs or evidences in his numerous criticisms of the superstitions or falsehoods of his age. He offered five “tests” (nien) to prove that thunder was not the wrath of Heaven but only a kind of fire generated by the friction of the yin and yang fluids in the air. And he produced many a proof to support his thesis that there were no ghosts or spirits. One of those proofs is most ingenious and so far irrefutable: “If a ghost is the spirit of the dead man, then the ghost should be seen only in naked form and could not be seen with clothes on his body. For surely the cloth or silk can have no soul or spirit to survive destruction. How can it be explained that ghosts have never been seen in naked form, but always with clothes on?”[^2]

###### p.283

This new Confucian movement needed a new logical method, a “novum organum,” which it found in a little essay of post-Confucian origin entitled The Great Learning, an essay of about 1,700 Chinese characters. From that little essay, the founders of Neo-Confucianism picked out one statement which they understood to mean that “the extension of knowledge lies in the investigation of things.” That soon became one of the central doctrines in the philosophy of the school of the Ch’eng brothers (Ch’eng Hao, also called Ch’eng Ming-tao, 1032–1085, and Ch’eng I, also called Ch’eng I-ch’uan, 1033–1107), especially as that philosophy was interpreted and reorganized by the great Chu Hsi (1130–1200). The investigation of things was further interpreted to mean “seeking exhaustively to investigate the reason (li) in all things.”

What are “things”? According to the Ch’eng-Chu school, the scope of “things” was as extensive as Nature itself, including “every grass and every shrub” as well as “the height of the heavens and the thickness of the earth.” But such a conception of the “things” to be investigated was beyond the capability of the philosophers, who were men of affairs and politicians as well as thinkers and teachers of men. They were more vitally interested in the moral and political problems of men than in the investigation of the reason or law in every grass or shrub. So Ch’eng I himself began to narrow down the scope of “things” to three categories: the study of books, the study of men of the past and the present, and the study of what is right in dealing with practical affairs. “Always begin with what is nearest to you,” he said. And Chu Hsi, the greatest of the Sung (960–1279) philosophers and the most eloquent and untiring exponent of the philosophy of the investigation of the reason in all things, devoted his whole life to the study and exposition of the Classics of Confucianism. His Commentary on The Four Books (the “New Testament” of Neo-Confucianism) and his Commentaries on The Book of Odes and The Book of Changes were accepted as the standard texts for seven centuries. The philosophy of the investigation of the reason in all things was now definitely applied to the limited field of classical studies. 

Truly inspired by the “Socratic tradition” of Confucius, Chu Hsi worked out a set of principles on the spirit, the method, and the procedure of investigation and research. He said, “Investigate with an open mind. Try to see the reason (li) with an open mind. And with an open mind follow reason wherever it leads you.” What is an open mind? Chu Hsi said, “Retreat one step back, and think it over: that is the open mind.” “Do not press your own opinion too much forward. Suppose you put your own opinion aside for a while, and try to see what the other side has to say. Just as in hearing a case of litigation, the mind is sometimes prejudiced in favor of A, and you are inclined to seek evidences against his opponent B, or vice versa. It is better to step aside and calmly and slowly study what both sides have to say. Only when you can step aside can you see things more clearly. The Master Chang Tsai (also called Chang Heng-ch’ü, 1020–1077) said, ‘Wash away your old ideas to let new ideas come in.’ If you do not put aside your preconceived notions, where and how can you get new ideas?”

The Neo-Confucians of the eleventh century often stressed the importance of doubt in thinking. Chang Tsai had said, “The student must first learn to be able to

###### p.284

doubt. If he can find doubt where no doubt was found before, then he is making progress.” As an experienced worker in textual and semantic researches, Chu Hsi was able to develop a more practical and constructive methodology out of the idea of doubt. He realized that doubt did not arise of itself, but would come only when a situation of perplexity or difficulty was present. He said: “I used to tell students to think and to seek points of doubt. But I have come to understand that it is not fruitful to start out with the intention of finding things to doubt. Just study with an open mind. After working hard at a text, there will be places which block your path and cause you perplexity. That’s where doubts naturally come up for you to compare, to weigh, to ponder over.” “The student [as it has been said] should learn to find doubt where no doubt had previously existed, but he should also learn to resolve the doubt after it has arisen. Then he is making real progress.” 

Doubt would arise in a situation in which conflicting theories simultaneously claimed credulity and acceptance. Chu Hsi told of his early doubts when he found that “the same passage in The Analects had been given widely different explanations by various commentators.” “That,” said he, “led me to doubt.” How is doubt to be resolved? “By keeping one’s mind open,” he said. “You may have your own view, but it may not be the correct view. Do not hold it dogmatically. Put it aside for a while, and search for more and more instances to be placed side by side, so that they may be compared. Then you may see through and understand.” In one of his letters to his friend and philosophical opponent, Lu Chiu-yuan (also called Lu Hsiang-shan, 1139–1193), he again used the example of the judge trying a case of litigation: “Just like the judge trying a difficult case, one should keep his mind open and impartial, and must not let his own inclination or disinclination influence his thinking. He can then carefully listen to the pleading of both sides, seek evidences for cross-checking, and arrive at a correct judgment of right and wrong.” 

What Chu Hsi was saying amounts to a method of resolving doubt by first suggesting a hypothetical view and then searching for more instances or evidences for comparison and for checking the hypothesis “which may not be correct” and which Chu Hsi sometimes described as “a temporarily formed doubting thesis” (ch’üan-li i-i)[^3]. In short, the method of doubt and resolution of doubt was the method of hypothesis and verification by evidence. 

Chu Hsi told his students: “The trouble with you is that you are not capable of doubting; that’s why you do not make progress. As for myself, I have my doubt even in the least significant matters. As soon as one begins to doubt, one has to go on [thinking] until the doubt is completely resolved.” 

It was because of this inner urge to resolve doubts that Chu Hsi often confessed that, from his younger years on, he was fond of making investigations based on evidences (k’ao-cheng). He was one of the most brilliant minds in human history, yet he was never tired of hard work and patient research. 

His great achievement lies in two directions. In the first place, he was never tired of preaching the importance of doubt in thinking and investigation—doubt in the sense of a “tentatively formed doubting thesis,” doubt, not as an end in itself, but as a perplexity to be overcome, as a puzzling problem to be solved, as a challenge to

## 

###### p.304

This intellectual revolution has two aspects. Negatively, we should get rid of our deep-rooted prejudice that, while the West has undoubtedly excelled in its material and materialistic civilization, we Orientals can take pride in our superior spiritual civilization. We may have to get rid of this unjustifiable pride and learn to admit that there is very little spirituality in the civilization of the East. And positively, we should learn to understand and appreciate that science and technology are not materialistic but are highly idealistic and spiritual values; indeed they represent a true idealism and spirituality sadly underdeveloped in our Oriental civilizations.

First, I submit that there is not much spirituality in our older civilizations of the East. What spirituality is there in a civilization which tolerated so cruel and inhuman an institution as footbinding for women for over a thousand years? Or in a civilization which tolerated the caste system for many thousands of years? What spiritual values are there in a civilization which considers life as painful and not worth living and which glorifies poverty and mendicancy and sanctifies disease as an act of the gods? 

Indeed, what spirituality is there in an old beggarwoman who dies in dire destitution but who dies still mumbling Namo Amitabha!—dying in the hope that her soul may go to that blissful paradise presided over by the Amita Buddha? 

It is high time that we Orientals begin to confess that there is little or no spirituality in such old civilizations which belong to an age when man had reached physical senility and mental sluggishness and felt himself impotent to cope with the forces of nature. Indeed, a full realization of the total absence of spirituality and even of vitality in such old civilizations seems to be a necessary intellectual preparation for a full understanding of the modern civilization of science and technology which glorifies life and utilizes human intelligence for betterment of the conditions of life. 

Second, it is equally important and necessary for us of the Orient to acknowledge freely that this new civilization of science and technology is not something forced upon us, nor something to be despised or reluctantly tolerated as the material civilization of the materialistic peoples of the West—but something which we must learn to love and respect as the truly great spiritual achievement of man. For modern science is the cumulative achievement of that which is the most spiritual and indeed most divine in man, namely, the creative intelligence of man, which seeks to know, to find, to wring from nature her little secrets by means of rigid methods of research and experimentation. 

“Truth is never easily found,” and never reveals itself to insolent souls who approach nature with unaided hands and untrained sense-organs. The history of science and the lives of the great scientists are most inspiring documents to enable us fully to understand the spiritual nature of the men of science,—the patience, the perseverance, the selfless search for truth, the disheartening failures, and the truly spiritual joy and raptures at moments of successful discovery and verification. 

In the same sense, even technology is not to be viewed as merely application of scientific knowledge to the making of tools and machines. Every tool of civilization is a product of the intelligence of man making use of matter and energy for the

###### p.305

embodiment of an idea or a vast combination of ideas or concepts. Man has been defined as Homo faber, as a tool-making animal. And it is tool-making that constitutes civilization. 

Indeed tool-making was so highly regarded by men that many a great invention such as fire was attributed to some of the greatest gods. Confucius was reported to have made the wise observation that all implements of civilization are spiritual in origin; they all came from “ideas” (hsiang). 

> When conceived, they are called ideas. When materially embodied, they are called implements. When instituted for general use, they are called models or patterns. When wrought into the everyday life of all the people, the people marvel them and call them the work of the gods. 

So it is not unbecoming for us Orientals to regard science and technology as highly spiritual achievements of men. 

In short, I propose that we of the East, on the threshold of new civilization of science and technology, would do well to acquire for ourselves some such intellectual preparation for its proper reception and appreciation.


[^1]: an example of the non-dual/nonseperation of knowledge and value
[^2]: an excellent example of reductio absurdum
[^3]: 中文是？