---
created: 2023-10-26
author: human
title: APEC座談
allDay: false
startTime: 09:00
endTime: 12:00
date: 2023-10-26
completed: 2023-10-27T01:20:32.350+08:00
type: single
---

Panel topic:
Talent Cultivation for Local Revitalization and Sustainable Development

Background:
The pandemic continues to impose substantial limitations on youth employment rate and women economic participation, and has inevitably led to a drastic impact on cross-regional trade and regional economies. To strengthen the role of education in promoting social, individual, economic and sustainable development, this project aims to create opportunities to promote how local revitalization initiatives focusing on sustainability and inclusive growth in rural areas can generate more opportunities for young people and women, and further improve the regional economic resilience through cross-border education cooperation.

Possible questions for discussion:
1. What’s your opinion on talent cultivation for local revitalization and sustainable development?
2. Do you have good ideas / models that can promote balanced, inclusive and sustainable development?
3. What do you think the role of education is in promoting social, individual, economic and sustainable development?
4. How do you transform education and learning using creativity, design, data and technology?
5. What does sustainable education mean to you?
6. How do you connect local revitalization and sustainable development with talent cultivation?
7. What do you think we can do to improve the regional economic resilience through cross-border education cooperation?

Speaking time estimation: 
Total time: 80 ÷ 5 = 16
Total questions: 16 ÷ (moder. 7 + Q&A 2) = <2 mins/question

Key messages:
- "Forecast-based" to "Agent-based" talent incubation
	- Whenever a forecast, especially those in social realm, is being made, there will inevitably be errors, or aspects that are misleading.
	- When a forecast goes through the bureaucratic system and eventually turns into policy, we should always beware that much of the original forecast, if not most of it, will already be outdated.
	- Lessons from complex systems theory: collective intelligence emerges from adaptive agents
	- Instead of processing students into nuts and bolts of some kind of forecasted social machinary, it is key to empower and enable students to become adaptive agents 
	- "Job/position-oriented mentality" to "Problem/need-oriented mentality" in career planning & education: 
		- "What are the 'good jobs' that pays (especially to school-aged children) and what do I need to equip to prepare myself for that?" 
		- "What are the needs and problems need to be addressed around me?"
	- Exemplary model: Design for Change
	- Underlying new pedagogical paradigm: 
		- From Learning by Reasoning & Doing
		- to Learning by Caring
	- Shift in resource structure:
		- from redeeming allocated resources
		- to regenerating reciprocal resources

|                                | From                  | To                      |
| ------------------------------ | --------------------- | ----------------------- |
| overall orientation (talent-perspective) | forecast-based        | agent-based             |
| overall orientation (eco-perspective) | for SD         |  as SD                       |
| mentality                      | job/position/function | problem/need            |
| pedagogy                       | reasoning, doing      | caring                  |
| resource                       | allocated/redeemed    | regenerative/reciprocal |


- Education "FOR" sustainability to Education "AS" sustainability
	- "FOR" means it's basically still a "forecast-based" approach, for some circumstances in the future
		- most common: knowledges and skills
	- we forget that our education system is part of the bigger unsustainable system
	- we don't notice what are the hidden premises underlying our education system
	- e.g., 
		- The fact that we study economics, physics, chemistry, history, business, finances, or computer sciences,but not mindfulness, interpersonal relationships, or the meaning of life presupposes that academic or vocational knowledge is sufficient for individuals and societies to thrive. However, the increasing ubiquityof mental illness, the polarization of societies, and of course, the climate and financial crises all showthat education centered on such knowledge and skills does not seem to be fulfilling its promise well. 
		- Also, the very existence of "top" or "best" majors and universities, and the collective mania for it, such as electricalengineering in Taiwan (黃 2020) or finances/business in Hong Kong (胡 2020), represents and reinforcestheir respective roles as the semiconductor production center and Asia financial center within the globaldivision of labor. Research has shown that this perpetuates the versions of globalization up to today, and almost unianimously considered as one of the major structural causes of unequal development among different regions, and holowization (or Kuudou-ka in Japanese and 空洞化 in Mandarin respectively), or even povertization of rural regions
		- (I'm not against globalization per se, but we need to reimagine and reconstruct it in ways that transforms the current problematic structure)
	- education "FOR" sustainable development isn't enough
	- education "AS" sustainable development means the embodiment of sustainable development in the very workings of the education system, or put it in another way, 
		- instead of factories manufacturing nuts and bolts with new functions of so called "SDGs"
		- redesign the education system "itself" to become an organic farm or ecological wetland that serves as (without a better term) an engine that transforms its surrounding landscape
	- the redesign of education system sounds huge, but it doesn't have to be. the systems we live in are "nested," meaning there are always smaller systems within bigger systems. e.g., 
		- Design for Change, learning by caring are examples
		- ZA Share under National Development Council, pilot in Kaohsiung
		- Alternative universities (Google "education as sustainable development & Adler Yang")


---

- education system for talent cultivation

Mo: no!
soldiers, take orders, one-size-fits-all
we need personalization 
enabling teachers
conveyor belt 
we're not thinking about 

- how do we incentivize for investing in talent

Jou: two kinds of knowledge, prediction & control vs critical & change

Q: connect effective education to parents

mo: society as human body
elders as eyes
youth as feet
global & local balance

Pearl:


- what does it mean by effective education? 
- education as commodity 
- cultural differences 
- deschooling: 
- agent-based 
- we assume system-level change
- forget 
- empowering agent in any levels in the system to transform 

Jou: empathy & value of equality, instead of competition

3-4 sentences 



Jou: 2 dimensions in regional revitalization
- economic
- cultural


centralized to decentralized/distributed network structures
effectiveness/efficiency to resilience/robustness


Mo: Children solve problems


- - - 

David:
- 清大外國學生要抗議，沒學到東西
- 美國指示日印來台做事，只要連結不求賺錢，錢從上面來
- 蔦屋3.0 實體空間做募資產品體驗，收入來自群募
- 國際基金會前不能亂花，需要量化評估，結果只能給永齡等大基金會

Alex: 
范特喜
60%來自改裝後租金
40%委託
10%政府、活動
希望活動跟B2B結合

社區工作如何量化？
量化企業就容易投入

持有一百萬點
趣味性
影響力
發起人自己決定

無法多方認證、無法追蹤
范特喜有機

客家莊
祭祀公業
大家不敢碰
家族就是會員 血統爭議 女生怎麼辦
管理員權力過大
能不能族譜重建？
女性族譜？
透過做這件事重新建立社會連帶
都市裡沒辦法做這些 因為人都是新的
姑婆牌 沒嫁出去的
很多事同性戀
透過族譜找到人有親切感 信任感

柯雅之
范特喜

范特喜應該跟政府合作避免仕紳化

蕭：
壯世代更有實力返鄉
不能一直丟年輕人
有事做就會回來

David:
新創聚落
加速器而不是育成中心

