---
created: 2024-12-15
author: human
title: 聽大問題節目對言語有感
allDay: false
startTime: 06:00
endTime: 07:00
date: 2024-12-15
completed: null
---



I am not my thoughts, nor my words.
My thoughts are no more than a fraction? of my becoming, the entirety of what I have been and maybe become. They are temporal, aspective, fuzzily finding their way to come into my awareness and to be grasped. 

For my thoughts being so unrepresentative of my becoming, my words are even less than that. 
In a speechless moment, there is not a void of thoughts. On the contrary, too much of them, beyond what can be captured in the finite repository of concepts that are inevitably linear, bounded, 

Whatever is said by someone, even I might like or dislike it, feel at home, threatened, or alienated by hearing it, they are also part of me. They are parts of my potentialities. They won’t be graspable by me if they are not, like the quality of sounds only hearable by plants, the unimaginable visions only visible by insects. My emotions and emerging thoughts, bringing forth my distance and ways of interacting with them, actually show that they are all possible roads to be traveled. They are parts of me as they are my potentialities. 

I easily show my deep heart and vulnerabilities in conversations face to face. Yet it has been a great difficulty to put forward my thoughts in words publicly. 

Now, I have noticed that this is a sign of my fear of division, a fear that the spatial-temporally contingent fraction of me is too big, so that blocks others’ eyes for them to see the greater whole that we share and are connected. 

This separation by language, can be mitigated with our full presence with each other, as the available mediums of knowing and connecting through copresence is beyond words. However, once words are thrown into the world to indefinite audiences, separation easily occurs if the speaker is reduced to their language, and the audience’s aversion of specific potentialities that resemble such language prevents them from seeing their existing underlying connection.

This may explain why the great teachers of humanity, Confucius, Socrates, Sikyamuni, Jesus, Muhammad, and more named and unnamed Indigenous people, did not write books, and also why the cannons people wrote about them led to great division and conflict. 

Such tearing apart is exacerbated on social media, where language is even more fragmented and interactions more reactionary. 

I venture to invite whoever comes a ccross my language to remember: I am not my thoughts, nor my words. My language is merely the ripples of a vast ocean in which we are connected. These ripples are to not to limit or separate our (co)becoming, but to enrich it by presenting the vitality and intricacies of our particularities. 


前一晚跟[[閉恩濡]]聊到跟[[王彥涵]]的和而不同有感