---
created: 2022-05-18
author: human
---

# 20220518, Wed


## To Dos
> **Legend**
> *Stages*
> 🛠 In progress
> ⏳ Waiting for (what? Specify:___)
> 📥 Back to inbox
> 🉑 Sufficiently done
> *Context*
> 📱 Mobile/Spare time
> 💻  Computer 
### Overdue tasks

### Today's tasks

- [ ] !!!+ Prioritization
	- [ ] 找[[朱建民]]老師當指導教授
	- [ ] 研究[[web 3]][[blockchain]]
	- [ ] 寫稿排程
		- [ ] 社群內容
		- [ ] [[KAS Panorama]]
		- [ ] [[台灣智庫]]
		- [ ] [[総合人間学会]]
- [ ] !!! review how is my time spent
- [ ] !!! [[青醒人共生文化智庫]]財務報表
	- [ ] 111年日記帳
	- [ ] 記入應付費用、款項、酬勞
- [ ] !!! Exercise for 20 min 
- [ ] !! 出門
	- [ ] 印護照委託書
	- [x] 拍照
	- [ ] 寄發票
- [ ] !! 
- [ ] !! 
- [ ] !! 
- [ ] !! Read for 30 min & capture excerpts + take notes 
- [ ]  Organize and clear inbox

## Communication Log

Hi Joss, 

As we begin to arrange the Chinese translation of the Blockchain course, our stakeholders have some points that they'd like me to double check with you:

1.We will send the translated Chinese .srt subtitle files to you by the end of June.
2.We will provide the translated YouTube "Video Title" and "Video Description" for you to use freely, but we would like you to not omit the following information:
2.1. Contributors to the Chinese translation, which include but is not limited to the translator(s), proofreader(s), reviewer(s), and sponsors.
2.2. Link to the aforementioned contributors' profiles/websites, if applicable.
2.3. Creative Common 4.0 license requirement to attribute both the System Innovation and the Contributors to the Chinese Translation.
3.The sponsor(s) are allowed to reuse the course material in accordance to the Creative Commons 4.0 license, correct? 
4.As the National Development Council-commissioned education innovation fellowship members will need to start taking the Blockchain course in July, would it be ok that you upload the .srt files and put on the Chinese "Titles" and "Descriptions" of the YouTube videos in 7 days after you receive our files?

Thanks a lot! It's a pity that I cannot attend the SI conference due to travel restrictions, but I do hope to learn more about it and wish you the best with the conference!

P.S. I tried sending you this message earlier today (yesterday on in Taiwan) on the SI platform but it failed to deliver. 


see also (for longer records) -> 

## Reflections
