---
created: 2022-12-30
author: human
---

# 20221230, Fri


## To Dos
> **Legend**
> *Stages*
> 🛠 In progress
> ⏳ Waiting for (what? Specify:___)
> 📥 Back to inbox
> 🉑 Sufficiently done
> *Context*
> 📱 Mobile/Spare time
> 💻  Computer 
### Overdue tasks

### Today's tasks

- [ ] !!!+ 
- [ ] !!! 
- [ ] !!! 
- [ ] !!! Exercise for 20 min 
- [ ] !! 
- [ ] !! 
- [ ] !! 
- [ ] !! 
- [ ] !! Read for 30 min & capture excerpts + take notes 
- [ ]  Organize and clear inbox

## Communication Log

see also (for longer records) -> 

##### Comment to the Modo Project(https://www.modos.tech/)

I'm a current user of the Lenovo Thinkbook Plus Gen2, which I believe you must be aware of. Without sufficient coding skills, I hope to contribute to your project by sharing my need and experience. 

I want to alleviate the burden on my eyes that comes from heavy reading as a researcher, but using a stand-alone e-reader is too inconvenient in terms of syncing my research documents (i.e., books/papers/documents WITH annotations & notes). For example, I tried using a kindle reader, but the synchronization of non-kindle-native papers/documents (which is often the case as a researcher) between it and my computer requires completely manual work, thus too time-consuming to ever work out. 

So I explored several solutions over many years. 

I first tried using Onyx Boox as an external monitor for my Macbook. It was too sluggish to be practically usable. The security risks of Onyx as a Chinese company are also concerning.

Later, when I discovered the Lenovo Yogabook c930, it was unavailable in my region, completely sold out in other markets, and doesn't seem to be supported anymore. If it's still available and supported, I still think there's a great chance that I will buy it instead of the Lenovo Thinkbook Plus Gen2, for its portability and convenience for everyday reading (e.g., literature reviews) and concept-mapping for research. As long as my research database can be seamlessly synced across devices (e.g., via dropbox, Google Drive/Office365, or Zotero), I expect that the writing and other CPU-consuming tasks can be done on a separate computer with higher specs (I was a >10 year Macbook Pro user before ThinkBook Plus Gen2 naturally becomes my de facto device).

Then Lenovo released the 1st Gen of Thinkbook Plus. I tried it. The E-ink display was too small, and its functionality was too limited (only supported Lenovo's native e-ink reader app and several native widgets, without anything else). 

Fortunately, they announced their 2nd Gen soon afterward. While there were no retailers for me to try it out in my region, I still ordered it as it now supports all apps to be used on the e-ink display. The device I'm using now is my second TB Gen2 -- the first one they shipped to me had too many problems and crashed all the time, so they shipped me a replacement as their customer service gave up fixing the original one after I returned the device too many times. 

The device I have now still has bugs occasionally, but overall its features are very satisfactory. I use the e-ink display to read and annotate my reading materials and shift to the LCD display for writing and other general tasks. When connected to an external display, I like to use its e-ink display as a drawing pad for doing annotations and drawing (It'll be even better if the external display was colored e-ink). While Lenovo is also a Chinese company so the security concern is still a setback, I guess I compromised for its suitability to my use-case and comforted (deceived?) myself that Lenovo is more reputable and trust-worthy than Onyx. 

However, since Lenovo dropped their e-ink line since the 3rd Gen of Thinkbook Plus, I'm quite concerned about how long my device will be supported and keen to find 3rd party support/alternatives. It'll be fantastic if your drivers/apps can be used on other devices such as mine, and I also look forward to using your external display!

Wish you all the best and keep up the good work! 

## Reflections

去日本前的任務
- [ ] 修老蘋果
- [ ] 東吳哲學報告
	- [ ] 朱建民2
	- [ ] 高柏園1
	- [ ] 楊祖漢1
	- [ ] 米建國
- [ ] Michael Slote 
- [x] 日文書數位建檔
	- [ ] 
- [ ] 日本禮物
- [ ] 換日幣
- [ ] PCR
- [ ] 聯繫日本拜訪
- [ ] 11-12會計
- [ ] obsidian 系統優化
- [ ] 辦投資帳戶
- [ ] 討論日本買房
- [ ] 國教院
- [ ] 🛠️Christopher Day
- [ ] 🛠️讓Jerry 用taption 匯入影片
- [ ] 掛號拿舌下錠
- [ ] 🛠️二手物品出清


