---
created: 2021-03-19
author: human
---

# 20210319, Fri


## To Dos
> **Legend**
> *Stages*
> 🟡 In progress
> 🔴 Waiting for (what? Specify:___)
> 🟢 Back to inbox
> *Context*
> 📱 Mobile/Spare time
> 💻  Computer 
### Overdue tasks

### Today's tasks

- [x] !!!+ 國稅局簽字
	- [x] 問會計師問題
- [ ] !!! 
- [ ] !!! 
- [x] !!! Exercise for 20 min 
- [x] !! 領手機
- [ ] !! 
- [ ] !! 
- [ ] !! 
- [ ] !! Read for 30 min & capture excerpts + take notes 
- [ ]  Organize and clear inbox

## Communication Log

see also (for longer records) -> 

## Reflections
### Rate the day (0-10, 5 as neutral):
Mood: 
Energy: 
Clarity: 

### Accomplishments

### Problems

### Awareness
Whether I should write something about the salmon chaos through the lens of dsrp?
See also -> 
[[202103192234 seeing the complexity of the Salmon chaos from DSRP]]
By thinking about the question above, I sensed that stress and uneasiness have emerged from my body. 

That stress and uneasiness urged me to ask: Do I really want to tap onto the hot current issues to get attention? Is that really the kind of person I feel comfortable being? 

Considering my contrarian view on many hot topics, I become aware that am afraid to go against the popular view because the Orwellian speech policing is too extreme today

But if I want to become a public intellectual that aims to address important wicked issues, how could I evade from being involved in disputes?

### Lesson Learned

### Future Considerations

Inspired by [Catalyzing Transformational Change - Sally Uren](https://youtu.be/dIQ0NSpr2l4)
Would it be possible to bring pioneer thinkers and Taiwan's pioneer changemakers together to crosspollinate and produce something -- some knowledge or action?

How might I "curate" the contents on our official blog, so it builds expectations or caters to the needs of the readers?
- Who are the readers?

