---
created: 2021-01-25T20:48
author: human
---

#excerpts
Author: [[Tevington, Patricia]]
Source: [[@tevingtonPrivilegedWorrySocial2018]]
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/00380253.2017.1389251
Retrieved {January 25, 2021}

> How do differences in cultural capital operate in conditions of uncertainty? Interviews with 106 young adults of different social class backgrounds demonstrate significantly different knowledge of ...

# Privileged to Worry: Social Class, Cultural Knowledge, and Strategies toward the Future among Young Adults

The data for this article come from a sample of qualitative interviews that explored how young adults of various social backgrounds experienced coming of age during the Great Recession. Interviews were conducted mostly during the fall of 2010 and the summer of 2011 with 2004, 2005, and 2006 graduates of public high schools from ==three townships== in the ==Philadelphia area==. While these communities were selected for their modal social-class makeup, respondents' social-class designation is based on parental background, as outlined below. In total, ==106 in-depth interviews== were conducted.

> [[research methods]] considerations for [[2021 TIES]]:
> - The research doesn't have to be national, if sampling can be justified. 
> - The sample size doesn't have to be enormous. 

The basis of this study comes from a larger project that was launched to investigate how the Great Recession was reshaping the transition to adulthood (Kefalas, Carr, Tevington, and Napolitano 2016). Three townships in the Philadelphia area were selected for their ==general social and economic makeup== ^[Validity]as well as for their ==proximity to one another== ^[Convenience]. The resources and expectations of each community—especially the varying levels of funding and support available to public high schools—were expected to influence the young adults' transitions.

The first community, from which most of the working class young adults were drawn, is a racially and ethnically diverse area—with slightly more than 55 percent of its residents being white and the remainder mostly black or Asian (U.S. Census Bureau [2015a](#)U.S. Census Bureau. 2015a. _American FactFinder: ACS Demographic and Housing Estimates for Community A_. Retrieved March 22, 2017. Washington, DC. [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2015a&author=U.S.+Census+Bureau&title=American+FactFinder%3A+ACS+Demographic+and+Housing+Estimates+for+Community+A.))—that borders a poor neighborhood of Philadelphia. About 30 percent of residents have a bachelor's degree or more (U.S. Census Bureau [2015d](#)U.S. Census Bureau. 2015d. _American FactFinder: Educational Attainment for Community A._ Retrieved March 22, 2017. Washington, DC. [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2015d&author=U.S.+Census+Bureau&title=American+FactFinder%3A+Educational+Attainment+for+Community+A.)) and the township has a median family income of approximately $61,000 (U.S. Census Bureau [2015g](#)U.S. Census Bureau. 2015g. _American FactFinder: Selected Economic Characteristics for Community A_. Retrieved March 22, 2017. Washington, DC. [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2015g&author=U.S.+Census+Bureau&title=American+FactFinder%3A+Selected+Economic+Characteristics+for+Community+A.)).

The second township, from which most of the middle class young adults hailed, is adjacent to the first community but does not border the city of Philadelphia. The township is more than 90 percent white (U.S. Census Bureau [2015b](#)U.S. Census Bureau. 2015b. _American FactFinder: ACS Demographic and Housing Estimates for Community B_. Retrieved March 22, 2017. Washington, DC. [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2015b&author=U.S.+Census+Bureau&title=American+FactFinder%3A+ACS+Demographic+and+Housing+Estimates+for+Community+B)). Over 55 percent of its residents have at least a bachelor's degree (U.S. Census Bureau [2015e](#)U.S. Census Bureau. 2015e. _American FactFinder: Educational Attainment for Community B_. Retrieved March 22, 2017. Washington, DC. [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2015e&author=U.S.+Census+Bureau&title=American+FactFinder%3A+Educational+Attainment+for+Community+B.)) and its median family income is approximately $115,000 (U.S. Census Bureau [2015h](#)U.S. Census Bureau. 2015h. _American FactFinder: Selected Economic Characteristics for Community B_. Retrieved March 22, 2017. Washington, DC. [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2015h&author=U.S.+Census+Bureau.&title=American+FactFinder%3A+Selected+Economic+Characteristics+for+Community+B.)).

The third township, from which most of the upper middle class young adults were drawn, is a suburb of Philadelphia that is colloquially regarded as a wealthy community. This community is about 85 percent white in racial background, with a growing population of Asians and blacks in recent years (U.S. Census Bureau [2015c](#)U.S. Census Bureau. 2015c. _American FactFinder: Demographic and Housing Estimates for Community C._ Retrieved March 22, 2017. Washington, DC. [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2015c&author=U.S.+Census+Bureau&title=American+FactFinder%3A+Demographic+and+Housing+Estimates+for+Community+C.)). More than 75 percent of its residents have at least a bachelor's degree (U.S. Census Bureau [2015f](#)U.S. Census Bureau. 2015f. _American FactFinder: Educational Attainment for Community C_. Retrieved March 22, 2017. Washington, DC. [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2015f&author=U.S.+Census+Bureau&title=American+FactFinder%3A+Educational+Attainment+for+Community+C.)) and its median family income approaches $165,000 (U.S. Census Bureau [2015i](#)U.S. Census Bureau. 2015i. _American FactFinder: Selected Economic Characteristics for Community C_. Retrieved March 22, 2017. Washington, DC. [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2015i&author=U.S.+Census+Bureau&title=American+FactFinder%3A+Selected+Economic+Characteristics+for+Community+C.)).

Respondents were ==classified as working class or lower-middle class if they did not have a parent with either a bachelor's degree or a managerial/professional job== ^[Definition of the constructs/variables] (Lareau [2011](#)Lareau, Annette. 2011. _Unequal Childhoods: Class, Race, and Family Life, 2nd Edition with an Update a Decade Later_. Berkeley: University of California Press. [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&publication_year=2011&author=Annette+Lareau&title=Unequal+Childhoods%3A+Class%2C+Race%2C+and+Family+Life%2C+2nd+Edition+with+an+Update+a+Decade+Later)).[3](#)3\. I considered respondents' parents to be their biological or adoptive parents, their primary guardian (such as a grandmother), and any resident stepparents or cohabiting partners of parents with whom respondents lived during childhood or adolescence. The highest occupational or educational level of any of these parents/guardians was used in determining the social class of the respondents.View all notes For brevity's sake, I refer to this sample as “working class.” Most parents of respondents classified as working class held a high school diploma, some sort of trade certificate, or some college. However, this sample also included a handful of children of immigrants, whose parents' educational credentials from their home countries had not connected them to professional jobs in the United States. Parental jobs were mostly blue-collar, paraprofessional, or clerical, such as construction workers, truck drivers, hairstylists, or administrative assistants. Forty-two respondents were classified as working class. Of the respondents themselves, 50 percent (_N_ = 21) were college graduates.[4](#)4\. Likely because of the geographic proximity to a number of colleges in the area and some of the recruitment methods (i.e., snowball sampling), this sample overrepresented upwardly mobile working class youth. However, despite their educational credentials, respondents with working class origins expressed the same sentiments as their peers, giving further credence to the importance of social origin in the formation of strategies for the future.View all notes

Respondents were considered middle class if at least one parent had a bachelor's degree and at least one parent had a professional/managerial job. Parental jobs were generally mid-level managerial or professional in nature with a degree of autonomy and the supervision of others. Examples include salesmen, teachers, and accountants. Twenty-three respondents were classified as middle class. Of the respondents themselves, 56 percent (_N_ = 13) were college graduates.

Upper middle class respondents were distinguished from middle class respondents with the following criteria: one parent held a graduate or professional degree or an especially high-level occupational position. Parental jobs were high-level managerial, professional, or entrepreneurial in nature, such as vice presidents, lawyers, doctors, or large business owners. Forty-one respondents were classified as upper middle class. Of the respondents, 78 percent (_N_ = 32) of this sample were college graduates.

==Respondents were recruited using a variety of measures, such as solicitation on alumni websites, social networking, random samples from graduation lists, and snowball sampling through prior respondents.== With the respondents' permission, the interviews were recorded and then transcribed verbatim. The ==interviewer wrote ethnographic field notes after each interview.== The author conducted approximately 75 percent of the interviews. At the time of the data collection, I was a recent college graduate employed as a research assistant at a local university. I found that being close in age to my respondents and hailing from the same general geographic area offered me a great deal of rapport. Additional interviews were conducted by trained researchers and research assistants. Respondents were paid a stipend of $40. Interviews ranged from an hour to three hours in length and were conducted in a place of the respondent's choosing, with most taking place in public spaces such as coffee shops.

During the data collection process, I was often taken aback by the apparent optimism expressed by the working class young adults and the middle class young adults. While most would acknowledge their circumstances as unfortunate, they were often insistent that their dreams remained within reach. Similarly, I was surprised to hear the pronounced worry about the future that many upper middle class young adults expressed, since I had assumed the greater resources available to them would “cushion” them from the difficulties of the recession. These ==impressions were written in my field notes at the time of data collection.== These diverging attitudes became much more apparent and prevalent when I took to ==coding the interview data.== It became apparent to me that their knowledge of the economic forces was driving the “ramped up” anxiety of the upper middle class.

I completed two rounds of coding, using the qualitative data analysis software Atlas.ti. For the first round of coding, I employed a strategy of “[[research methods#Open Coding|open coding]]” (LaRossa [2005](#)LaRossa, Ralph. 2005. “Grounded Theory Methods and Qualitative Family Research.” _Journal of Marriage and Family_ 67(4):837–57. [\[Crossref\]](/servlet/linkout?suffix=CIT0050&dbid=16&doi=10.1080%2F00380253.2017.1389251&key=10.1111%2Fj.1741-3737.2005.00179.x), [\[Web of Science ®\]](/servlet/linkout?suffix=CIT0050&dbid=128&doi=10.1080%2F00380253.2017.1389251&key=000232608700006), [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&volume=67&publication_year=2005&pages=837-57&issue=4&author=Ralph+LaRossa&title=%E2%80%9CGrounded+Theory+Methods+and+Qualitative+Family+Research)), focusing on the identification of key categories and themes. That is, after reading through the entirety of the data, I brainstormed a round of codes that captured broad key themes and topics from the interview guide and the interview conversations, such as “Great Recession,” “struggles-employment,” “American dream,” and “views of the future.” In this first round of coding, I was again struck by the different attitudes expressed by the working and middle class versus the upper middle class. Moreover, I noted the depth of knowledge about the economic downturn expressed by the upper middle class, as they tended to speak at length and with great nuance about the structural forces affecting young adult trajectories while the working class and the middle class offered much briefer reflections on these issues.

In the second round of coding, I used “[[research methods#Axial Coding|axial coding]]” (LaRossa [2005](#)LaRossa, Ralph. 2005. “Grounded Theory Methods and Qualitative Family Research.” _Journal of Marriage and Family_ 67(4):837–57. [\[Crossref\]](/servlet/linkout?suffix=CIT0050&dbid=16&doi=10.1080%2F00380253.2017.1389251&key=10.1111%2Fj.1741-3737.2005.00179.x), [\[Web of Science ®\]](/servlet/linkout?suffix=CIT0050&dbid=128&doi=10.1080%2F00380253.2017.1389251&key=000232608700006), [\[Google Scholar\]](http://scholar.google.com/scholar_lookup?hl=en&volume=67&publication_year=2005&pages=837-57&issue=4&author=Ralph+LaRossa&title=%E2%80%9CGrounded+Theory+Methods+and+Qualitative+Family+Research)) as I focused on the subcategories and distinctive elements of the codes established in the first round. For example, the general code of “views of the future” was subdivided into “views of the future-global” (which captured respondent's discussion of broader issues, such as the country's recovery and generational effects), and “views of the future-personal” (which captured more of the respondent's particular trajectory) to flesh out the distinctive features of these responses. I also combed through discussions of the Great Recession, respondents' accounts of struggles, and their plans for the future for indications of overall “optimistic” or “anxious” attitudes. Finally, I searched for evidence of respondents' altering of their plans in response to the economic downturn, which resulted in a series of codes: “strategies- adulthood” (i.e., living arrangements), “strategies-employment,” and “strategies-education.”

As is the case for most qualitative research, this sample is not empirically representative. It is slightly skewed female (57 respondents were women and 49 were men), is approximately 78 percent white (_N_ = 83), and is limited to recruitment from public schools within a specific regional area. However, no differences emerged based on gender or racial/ethnic identification with regard to narratives of the recession. While not empirically generalizable, the data nevertheless offer theoretical insight into a range of perspectives across the social class divide regarding cultural capital and the structural constraints introduced by the Great Recession.
