---
created: 2025-04-07
author: human
---


Dear Ju

I know it might be awkward to write to you in English, but I'm doing so to make our correspondence fully transparent and to respect your partner and relationship.

Until today, I still can't help avoiding our conversation on the night we got together to come up in my mind, in my dreams. 

I said, "You are a rare zhiyin that I want to cherish and support each other for my whole life," and I meant it. However, the dilemma is that the two must first be zhiyin to become suitable romantic partners, yet they might no longer remain zhiyin if their romantic relationship doesn't work out. 

You encouraged me to take a leap of faith. I did. 

Seeing our complete disconnection today, I guess what I feared came true? 

The years we spent together were the most transformative time of my life, and I am and will be grateful for them forever. My soul continues to tear in the absence of you. But I don't want to force you into an unpleasant reconnection. This dilemma lives on even after 13 years— perhaps for my whole life if I can’t find a resolution. 

I’ve always adored the way you shine. Even I can no longer see it with my eyes, it's my genuine hope that you continue to shine with greater eudamonia and wisdom. 

With the cycle of history, we’re reentering a time of great chaos and conflict. Amid such difficulty and uncertainty, I hope this incense can bring the deepest blessings from the East and clear the clouds and storms hovering over you. 

