---
created: 2021-03-25T20:56
author: human
---

Created on: [[20210325]]
About who: [[Hart, Keith]]
About what: [[@hartBuildingHumanEconomy]]

Given our preference to anchor economic strategies in people’s everyday lives, their
aspirations and their local circumstances, the intellectual movement that defines our
research is conceived of as extension from the local towards the global^[Might it be related to emergence in any way?]. We can’t arrive instantly at a view of the whole, but we can engage more concretely with the world that lies beyond the familiar institutions that immediately secure people’s rights and interests. According to Mauss (1925) and Polanyi (1944) especially -- indeed all the founders of modern social theory -- the chief way of achieving social extension has always been through markets and money in a variety of forms (Hann and Hart 2009, 2011; Hart and Ortiz 2014). Lindiwe could not juggle the plethora of institutions and activities she relies on without money. Money and markets are intrinsic to our human potential, not anti-human as they are often depicted^[Would like to know more] (Hart 2000). They should take forms that are more conducive to economic democracy. Her unanswered questions require answers grounded in the circumstances she knows well, but also capable of opening up to broader perspectives. It helps to recognize that money and markets span the extremes of human existence: they link us to the universe of our social relations and give precise definition to our most intimate circumstances. As Simmel (1900) said, money reflects our human potential to make universal society. It is also true, of course, that human motivations for economic action are more holistic than the economists allow for, taking in concerns for well-being and the good life, for example. These too have traditionally been shaped by organized religion. A human economy approach must revisit the complex interaction between religion, education and economy.