---
created: 2021-01-31T16:50
author: human
---

[[[[@molanderAnatomyInequalityIts2016]]
[[Molander, Per]]

‘Can political philosophy help us understand the story of inequality—and of equality? Political philosophy explores what makes a good society. There are essentially three ways to pursue this philosophical inquiry. ^[Can also be considered as examples of how might we use philosophy to study the human predicament? [[research methods]]] One approach—a relatively lazy one— ==is to use the status quo as a starting point and to discuss how best to manage it== ^[I can relate to this greatly. This approach ignores the historical context or the deeper factors that lead to the phenomenon.] . A philosopher might then suggest some marginal changes to society, all of which would stem from the current state. Niccolò Machiavelli and David Hume are exponents of this philosophical method.’

‘Another method is to ==begin with a sketch of a society==, neither arguing for nor against various alternatives. The Laws of Manu, which outlines the Indian caste system, and Plato’s Republic are examples from this tradition. These are not strictly works of political philosophy, however, because they avoid the question of how the proposed solution will gain legitimacy. Instead, they simply make reference to some historical mystery or shadow. Some more recent examples are Thomas More’s Utopia, Tommaso Campanella’s The City of the Sun, and Robert Owen’s A New View of Society. The common feature of these blueprints is their level of detail: there are rules and regulations for all of life’s eventualities, and even forays into urban planning.’

‘The third and more purely philosophical tradition aims to first define rights and freedoms and then to establish^[Axiomatic approach, or approaching the problem from the essence. However, existentialist approaches might go against this.], on this basis, a legitimate foundation for political power. In one of the most important traditions, creating a society is presented as a social contract in which a group of people give up some of their individual freedoms in order to share in the fruits of the community. The philosophical discussion, then, is about the terms of this contract.

“==No actual historical situation is described== when employing this model of thought, even if there have been a few situations that have come close to resembling it. Nonetheless, it possesses a key strength: it clears the table of historical inheritance and other contingencies in order to discuss the terms from a perspective that, at the very least, has an egalitarian starting point, even if there is no guarantee of an egalitarian result. This approach is intellectually appealing; contract theories have been published at a fairly steady rate from classical antiquity to modern times. The first contributions come from the Greek philosophers, such as the Epicureans, the Cynics, and the Stoics—approaches that were systematized in the first century BCE by Lucretius in his work On the Nature of Things. During the Middle Ages, the concept was given a Christian framework by Manegold of Lautenbach and Nicholas of Cusa. Marsilius of Padua was bold enough to discuss contracts in non-religious terms, and in doing so, he was far ahead of his time. Hugo Grotius and Thomas Hobbes were still writing within a religious framework in the 1600s, even if it was quite clear that to them God was an “was an unnecessary hypothesis, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s analysis of the social contract presaged the French Revolution.”

“The work of Hobbes and Rousseau provoked liberal responses. This was classical liberalism, rather than social liberalism, and its proponents—Bernard Mandeville, Adam Smith, John Stuart Mill, and others—did not write in terms of a social contract. Indeed, contemporary heirs to the tradition, such as Friedrich von Hayek, have declared their contempt for the concept as a whole. Still, their thoughts about society often revolve around a kind of ideal constitution—one of von Hayek’s more prominent works is titled The Constitution of Liberty—so the approach is present, if unwittingly.”

