---
created: 2021-01-30T21:18
author: human
---

[[@polanyiGreatTransformationPolitical1944]]

>“Most societies have evolved ways of caring for their poor, for their disadvantaged. The industrial age ^[See also: [[modernity]], [[industrialization]]] made it increasingly difficult for individuals to take full responsibility for themselves ^[The problem that people experience as a result of being allocation dependent. [[Allocation Dependence 配分依存]]]. To be sure, a farmer might lose his crop, and a subsistence farmer has a hard time putting aside money for a rainy day (or more accurately a drought season). But he never lacks for gainful employment. ==In the modern industrial age, individuals are buffeted by forces beyond their control ^[a feature of monetary behavior (貨幣的行為), as described in [[Allocation Dependence 配分依存]]]. If [[unemployment]] is high, as it was in the Great Depression, and as it is today in many developing countries, there is little individuals can do==. They may or may not buy into lectures from free marketeers about the importance of wage flexibility (code words for accepting being laid off without compensation, or accepting with alacrity a lowering of wages), but they themselves can do little to promote such reforms, even if they had the desired promised effects of full employment. And it is simply not the case that individuals could, by offering to work for a lower wage, immediately obtain employment. Efficiency wage theories, insider-outsider theories, and a host of other theories have provided cogent explanations of why labor do not work in the manner that advocates of the self-regulating market suggested. But whatever the explanation, the fact of the matter is that unemployment is not a phantasm, modern societies need ways of dealing with it, and the self-regulating market economy has not done so, at least in ways that are socially acceptable. (There are even explanations for this, but this would draw me too far away from my main themes.) Rapid transformation destroys old coping mechanisms, old safety nets, while it creates a new set of demands, before new coping mechanisms are developed. This lesson from the nineteenth century has, unfortunately, all too often been forgotten by the advocates of the Washington consensus, the modern-day version of the liberal orthodoxy.”
\- [[Stiglitz, Joseph E.]]
