---
date: 20230421
time: 12:30
what: Earth Solutions press conference and morning conference session
when: after
people: corporate leaders
place: corporate event
why: being meta
energy: 3
sensation: 4
mood: 7
clarity: 6
---

note:: Wasn't very engaged in the socialization at the event, but wasn't very uneasy about it. I think that's because of my 無欲則剛 -- Not really needing/wanting to get things out of others, nor were I feeling inferior to these so called "top" leaders in Taiwan. Glad that I made a slight twist to my quote -- so it got a better literative taste and more natural to my style: 永續的解方，從為彼此的幸福多做一點點努力開始. Had the thought of saying hi to [[Tang, Audrey]], but didn't get the chance. But that's fine. While most of the talks didn't attract me, so I was reading about 富察's dissapearance in China and other NYT articles on US-China relationships for most of the part. But during the think tank session, after subconscious fermenting the inputs from the industry session, inspirations about [[Money Dependence 貨幣依存|money dependence]] naturally emerged -- (see [[2023-04-21 地球解方記者會]]). Although I was sleepy and almost being knocked-out, the background listening/reading mode seems to be working for me quite well in terms of getting myself inspired. It helped me see the [[DSRP]] in [[易經]] yesterday as well. I guess this is one of the ways that I let myself into the "meta" mode? Or letting the structural/contextual insights naturally emerge by putting a bit of cognitive distance beteen my consciousness and the material? 

