#_GTD_0_inbox

My note: 

Author: 
Source: 
https://www.quora.com/Can-someone-become-a-scholar-without-being-a-PhD-or-having-a-job
Retrieved {February 10, 2021}

> Yes indeed. The wheels of scholarship may be lubricated by a masters or doctoral degree but, at the end of the day, scholarship is about having something useful, interesting or important to say and, saying it in ways able to be checked off by accepted scholarly practice. However, this matter of degrees is also a very Western paradigm. In indigenous cultures, there are schools of lesser and higher learning where skills from the mundane to the highly esoteric are taught. Because of their critical roles in preserving and expanding key ancestral knowledge, one cannot merely drop by and knock on a door for entry or dial up a course on the internet. Students are ‘chosen’ and tested and their intensive practical and applied learning programs may go on for decades. For this reason they are often highly secretive and conducted at night. In Māori tribal nations, for example, scholarly experts in a traditional sense are called tohunga and align to different classes and levels. They study in what are termed, Whare Wananga - schools of higher learning - a name adopted by modern day universities. In Māori and other societies, these go back ancestrally, thousands of years, carried incessantly as our tūpuna moved from one homeland to the next, developing and preserving knowledge, all of which had to be committed to memory. Again, traditional Whare Wananga are not for general knowledge or consumption. Apart from things such as planting, navigation, fishing, the arts and weaponry/military tactics, there is also priestly and esoteric knowledge and practice along with history, genealogy and story telling. These variously fit into levels of knowledge: te mātauranga ō te kauae raro - knowledge of the lower jaw, and te mātauranga ō te kauae runga - knowledge of the upper jaw. While poetic, the kauae raro covered the more everyday skills for life and living and that of the kauae runga, deep, sacred and priestly knowledge including essential prayers and incantations and covered by specialist tohunga. The tohunga tamoko was an essential member of the ranks, along with many other specialist tohunga. The facial and body tattoos involved sacred blood on the heads and bodies of chiefs, male and female and was highly tapu. It was not a call for the everyday.

# Can someone become a scholar without being a PhD or having a job?
Yes indeed. The wheels of scholarship may be lubricated by a masters or doctoral degree but, at the end of the day, scholarship is about having something useful, interesting or important to say and, saying it in ways able to be checked off by accepted scholarly practice.

However, this matter of degrees is also a very Western paradigm. In indigenous cultures, there are schools of lesser and higher learning where skills from the mundane to the highly esoteric are taught. Because of their critical roles in preserving and expanding key ancestral knowledge, one cannot merely drop by and knock on a door for entry or dial up a course on the internet. Students are ‘chosen’ and tested and their intensive practical and applied learning programs may go on for decades. For this reason they are often highly secretive and conducted at night.

In Māori tribal nations, for example, scholarly experts in a traditional sense are called tohunga and align to different classes and levels. They study in what are termed, Whare Wananga - schools of higher learning - a name adopted by modern day universities. In Māori and other societies, these go back ancestrally, thousands of years, carried incessantly as our tūpuna moved from one homeland to the next, developing and preserving knowledge, all of which had to be committed to memory. Again, traditional Whare Wananga are not for general knowledge or consumption. Apart from things such as planting, navigation, fishing, the arts and weaponry/military tactics, there is also priestly and esoteric knowledge and practice along with history, genealogy and story telling. These variously fit into levels of knowledge: te mātauranga ō te kauae raro - knowledge of the lower jaw, and te mātauranga ō te kauae runga - knowledge of the upper jaw. While poetic, the kauae raro covered the more everyday skills for life and living and that of the kauae runga, deep, sacred and priestly knowledge including essential prayers and incantations and covered by specialist tohunga. The tohunga tamoko was an essential member of the ranks, along with many other specialist tohunga. The facial and body tattoos involved sacred blood on the heads and bodies of chiefs, male and female and was highly tapu. It was not a call for the everyday.
